He
says, just because you're the lowest ranking
table doesn't mean that you don't have an opinion.
I said, don't you? I have. He says, well, tell us. I
said, Mr. Secretary, when y'all get through with
that top man, don't send him back to us in Texas.
Well, that broke up the meeting because McNamara
strong but he wasn't as strong as people thought he
was if he didn't have both the hand of kennedy and
johnson behind him no secretary of defense is as
strong as mcnamara appeared to be on the surface
unless full faith and confidence of the boss
McNamara's a smart individual. Very smart. Very
intelligent. Not a practical guy. Some of the
people that he picked up to
support him were not particularly, I don't think,
as bright as they gave him credit for. For example?
Well,
one of the
people that helped dictate what was going on in
Vietnam,
had a
status room. And there in Washington, D.C., in the
Pentagon, some of these people would actually go
through exercises of sin. Well, now, what if we
moved a squad of eight men from here over to here?
Now,
you know, that's like me giving permission for a
couple of GS-14s to sit and play tic-tac-toos all
day. because nobody in Washington is going to move
eight men in Vietnam from here to there. But, you
know, this is not an exception. I mean, this is a
rule that they play such silly games, you know. So,
in other words, they try to control the situation.
Oh,
yeah. What was the general attitude towards
Secretary McNamara and the Pentagon? mixed
emotions, naturally there would be. You're
definitely going to get them in the military
because I personally think, and there's no way of
knowing, I personally think the military is a
little more inclined
to be a conservative GOP. The officers. I don't
know about you. And whenever you get a bunch of them
and they're having to work for a democratic
administration, well, a democratic
administration, you get uneasy feelings and so
on. Sure, they'll carry out to the best of their
ability and whatever the boss says, that goes. But
for instance, both McCone and Turner, knew full
well that I was a conservative Republican. They
were Democrats. And I stayed in that office eight
years. No, five years. One year under the first one
and four years under the second one. So you never
had any problem as far as political philosophies?
The idea is to get the job done. That's right.
That would have nothing to do with anybody. under a
democratic administration.
There was never any pressure on you while you were
in the military to vote a certain way? No, not at
all.
Okay. So much for McNamara. Now, you said, didn't
you say yesterday when we were talking that at this
time you met Harold Brown, who became Secretary of
Defense under Jimmy Carter? Did you say that? No,
see, Harold Brown was the next Secretary of the Air
Force following Gene Zucker. And that's where I
met and knew Harold Brown pretty much on an
intimate situation at that time. Because it was
while I was in the Secretary's office that the Air
Force felt that it needed another base in Vietnam.
And you have to go back and Well, who's in control
and why and where?
McVie, the top guy in Vietnam, of course, was an
army troop. The theater that this war was being
fought in belonged to the Navy. whose top
headquarters was in Hawaii.
The Air Force doesn't need another base. Well,
first the Air Force had to prove that it needed
another base to put more fighters in the Vietnam.
After that was proved, then
The Air Force had to either get the pressure put on
to the Navy, who was responsible for all
construction in Vietnam. The Army wasn't
responsible for construction, but the Navy was.
Okay.
Make the resources available to build the base.
Here's the money. We don't have the resources.
Still, the... don't need the base because now the
resources are such that we don't have the
resources.
Of course, the Navy didn't want the base because
its forte was to put the carriers offshore and fly
the missions from the carriers. If the Air Force
couldn't get a place to put their fighters, there
was no way they could fly them. Clark was too far,
too long a leg to fly a mission in on the fighter and
bring it back down. Okay, so the Air Force went back
now and said, prove to them that they needed a base
in Vietnam. In other words, took it out of the JCCS
and the services and went to the, at the secretary
level, we've proven that we need the fighters we
got to have this base but we want permission from
you for the air force to contract for and to execute
and build the base and the air force will supervise
the construction not touch any of the resources
that are already in country we'll go in there and
design the base bring the contractor in won't
bother anybody else logistically and build a base
and then pull it back out. The project was named
Turnkey. And that was exactly what it was,
Turnkey. No logistics support required from
anything that was already in country. Well,
McNamara
thought he'd work it back and forth, tore it apart,
put it back together. finally one day made the
decision to do it. Go ahead. Well, this tore the
Navy apart because it invaded their area in which
they were responsible for construction. And it
tore the Army apart because the Army had for years
been trying to limit how much capability the Air
Force actually developed to do design and
construction.
See, under the Key West Agreement, way back when
Truman was president, they divided the world. And
we got England, the United Kingdom, the Air Force.
The rest of the world was divided between the Army
and the Navy. Well, the first exception was we got
to do our own Air Force Academy.
Then the next exception was we got to do our own
housing worldwide. And all this time, others were
beginning to see us growing a capability that
would compete with them and push down their
organization because their organization was
large enough to do not only their own but ours too,
namely the Corps of Engineers. Right. Right.
Okay. Anyway, we got permission from McNamara to
do turnkey.
Where is the base supposed to be built? Beg your
pardon? Where was the base supposed to be located?
Okay. We took representatives from four
contracting firms to that net.
Colonel by the name of McGarvey from the air staff,
myself, were the escort officers to take them over
Here are the sites. We showed them two sites. One
was in Wei. We were there the day that the North
Vietnamese overran the border and started
pushing people out of Wei. But anyway, that was one
of the sites that had been approved. What year was
this? And the other was Tui Wah. Well, that would
be... This wasn't during Tet Offensive, was it?
Yes. It was the start of the Tet. So it was January
31st, 1968. Okay. Good on the date. That's your
job,
isn't it? 68? Yeah. That was 10. But it seems to me
that it should be sooner than that. It was earlier
than that. Because the buildup was 65. I know, but
see, I left. I left. So it couldn't have been Tet. It
would have had to be when the initial build-up,
which was 1965 in Vietnam.
That would be more logical.
Well, it was in the Johnson administration, sure.
So it would be in...
667 uh 66. still the secretary of defense he
resigned in 67 so late 66. okay okay anyway we took
these contractors over and showed them the two
sites the other site was tuyawa t-u-y-h-o-a and
tuyawa was the one that was ultimately chosen and
mcgarvey was the air staff project officer, and I
was the secretary project
officer. McGarvey was a full colonel, and I was
lieutenant colonel.
Following the completion, he made BG, and I made
full colonel. And
it was a practice that We had a weekly report on
Secretary Brown's desk Friday night before
leaving the Pentagon that gave him a complete
rundown of everything that had taken place at that
week, gave him the status of all the construction,
the yards poured, what percent of completion of
the runway was, a whole nine yards. This was quite
an exercise because Everything was across the
beach. There was no dock.
It was offloading the ships on the lighters and
bring the lighters across the beach. And this was
everything. All of the construction material,
all the fuel, all the food, the whole work,
everything came across the beach. Because again,
nothing was levied on or taxed anything that was
already there. And to make matters worse,
We were told that we would stay within the dollar
appropriation that had been granted to build the
base. There was no additional money, and we would
not go back to Congress and ask for additional
money. So this gave both McGarvey and me no end of
problems, because whenever there was a cost
overrun on one element, across all these miles, we
had to work out with those people over there, OK,
What are we going to give up, or what are we going to
change the quality of to cover that essential? And
back and forth, back and forth, both. One of the
American firms then took the job? Yes.
Abasco of New York, which is an electric bond and
share company, was the prime holding company that
took the job. Their forte is really power plants. I
mean, big, huge power plants. They are one of the
largest outfits in the United States. Why do they
want an airfield? I don't know. What kind of job do
they do? They're an outstanding job. But they're a
big subcontractor for paving and the runways and
the roads. underground and utilities and so on,
with a firm out of Florida that had worked on the
Kennedy Raceways and things like that down there.
And
it was a real good organization that they put
together. Did they hire Vietnamese to do the
manual labor? Oh,
yes. Sure, sure. And Stan McGarvey was promoted to
Colonel. It would be on the site. supervisor, the
Air Force colonel, he too was promoted to general.
So people were properly rewarded. Again, we held
it within the funds that were available and
reported back to Congress, reported to the
Department of Defense, and when the contractor
was through, when everybody retreated right back
over the beaches and came on home, and the birds
flew in, took over the base, and so on. How long did
it take to build? About 14 months, 16 months. Was it
effective as far as the area? Oh yes, very
definitely. Because they were flying missions
off of it before it was completed. It was in a very,
very peculiar location security-wise because
just 60 miles south of there, there never was
complete clean out of the communists. I mean, they
were that close all the
time. Whereabouts was it? Well,
it would be north of Cumberland Bay. OK. I know
where that is. Off Highway 1, huh? Yeah. So it's in
between Hawaii and Cam Ranh Bay.
Yeah. I had an interesting trip to Cam Ranh Bay too.
Tell me about that. We went into Cam Ranh Bay when
before anything had ever taken place other than
the fact that
some engineer troops were in there cutting roads
for the Army Depot portion of Comron. And I was
accompanying my boss, Mr. Turner at the time, and
the top civilian engineer from the Department of
Defense was a man by the name of Ed Sheridan, and he
was along in the group and took us in a big fly and had
a makeshift map on the wall. Here are the roads
we're cutting, and here are the ones we've already
cut. And we had flown out of the Tron
in, what
was the transport called? I don't know. The Army
transport or something. And they had met at, huh? I
don't know. What a little thing. Oh. From the
trough down the combine. Because they had no
landing. We just landed on dirt. And they had met us
out there with jeeps and machine guns mounted all
over the thing. And, you know, they took us in. They
started briefing. And here's what we're doing.
And we're definitely here. And finally he says,
are there any questions? Mr. Sheridan from the
Department of Defense says, what's that line? He
says, well, this is Army and that's Air Force, and
we're told that they're going to build a base over
here, but we don't know anything about it, and we
kind of doubt that they'll ever materialize.
Well, actually, as we had flown over, we saw our
contractors. They were already clearing the
field and clearing the way for the first runway to
go in to Comron Bay, and here this colonel was
briefing about what was going on on this side of the
line, and there was construction going over on the
other side of the line. He says... But we don't
think it'll ever come about. Well, the contractor
from the Navy, I mean, all that was contracted
through the Navy, was in there clearing it. So we
took off, and we certainly didn't give it a big wave
when I was back. But this was the clearing to put the
AM2 mat down, which was the runway, I'm going to
say. All in all, I had seven trips to Vietnam and six
to Thailand during that time. Why in Thailand?
Well, we had a number of bases in Thailand. Yeah.
And you were building on them? Well, we were
building on them. And then
we were building
a project that had a number of names and nicknames.
The windmill was one. But it was right up on the
Laos. Thai border, and it was the big intelligence
consolidation area that they were picking up
things out of Vietnam and so on at that location,
and then relaying them on back. But it was one of the
largest projects over there, run by the security
service.
I guess it was under construction for a while.
A year and a half,
I guess. But a lot of the stuff that they dropped
along the Ho Chi Minh Trail were,
not being one, so I don't know, but some type of
pickup communication devices and things like
that that they could sense, oh, but sense how much
tonnage was coming down the trail just by air. But
that was tucked away up in the jungle. But we
had three active bases that fighters
were all over. Thailand also is a wonderful place
to visit compared to Vietnam. You felt a little bit
more comfortable in Bangkok than you did in
Vietnam. What were the conditions like in
Vietnam?
Uh, in Vietnam I'd say they were, uh, they varied so
much, you know. You could,
uh, get one place and have fairly decent quarters
and vests, and another place,
uh, often wondered whether you were ever going to
find the luxury of these hanoms, uh, the, uh,
here in the city,
always wondering about security.
I personally stayed out of the more popular
places, because that's where all the trouble was.
There were other places most of the time for us to
go, Traveling at the level we were at,
we needed to stay in certain quarters that weren't
used and were pretty well guarded. We so desired to
have a meal right there at the quarters.
The hours were such that work late and get up early
and start again. We're not there to to spend a
lifetime with her and get that done and get out of
there. So you don't fall into the custom way of a
person who is assigned over there lives or plays
or, quote, enjoys life. What about inter-service
rivalry? We've alluded to some of that. It's been
eight years in Washington, DC. Did you see a lot of
inter-service rivalry?
I've got to address that in two parts.
The time that I was in the Secretary of the Air Force
office and back and forth and working with the Navy
and some agencies of the Army for the things that
had to go on in Vietnam. Yeah.
And yet, at that time, we had a a director of civil
engineering down in the military, named Bob
Curtin, who was a pretty smart individual. And he
tried to
eliminate some of this rivalry by establishing
what he called exchange officers with the other
services. Let's get some of our people working for
you and some of yours working for us, and we can get
rid of this bickering and so on. That's all well and
good. But the bickering doesn't really go on on the
work level. Captains and majors and lieutenant
colonels can work like heck with each other. This
is the job. Get it done. Goddamn colonels and
generals would like to do the bickering. Hey,
that's our job. Y'all back out of that. What can you
get put? Oh, four or five weeks. Well, hell, we've
got to have it done tomorrow. It can't happen. It's
our job. We'll get it done. Their priorities don't
fit their priorities. There's always a reason
why. But then I jumped all the way over when I went to
the Department of Defense as a general officer and
was a director in the Department of Defense,
dealing with all four services. And believe it or
not, I had more problems with my own service than I
did with the Army and the Navy and the Marines. What
do you mean? coming out of the Department of
Defense and saying, okay, here's a project we want
to work out, or here's a policy we want to get
established, and I'd have no problem with the Army
or the Navy or the Marines, but I'd find guys in the
Air Force fighting the hell out of me. You know? How
can you count for that? You know, the Air Force
likes to step back and look and think and... Some of
the others go, okay, if the higher echelon wants it
done this way, this is the way we'll do it. A little
bit different look at discipline, I guess you
could call it. So you think that the Air Force is not
as disciplined now or more thoughtful? More
thoughtful. I gave a hell of a lot of thought in
operation and maintenance of facilities. Now,
see, that was the forte that I was in, not combat or
not— personnel policy, but in the operation and
maintenance of facilities.
At that time, I was director of facility
maintenance, and this is what we would be talking
about. Facilities being housing, the whole work.
But the Air Force had set itself up and had
established the credentials of, boy, we are the
experts in operation and maintenance. Even
though the Army's been doing it and the Navy's been
doing it years longer than we have, we're the
experts. And had spent a lot of money to get their
people pretty well trained. Because having
responsibility for design and construction in so
small part of the world, their major effort was put
in to operation and maintenance of the soldiers.
And therefore, they quickly claimed to be the
experts, whereas the other engineering services
for Army, Navy, and Marines, the Army and the Navy,
they had to spread themselves over design,
construction, operation, and maintenance, and
try to be experts in all of it. The Air Force did have
I think probably a little bit higher degree of
expertise. But again, just the cooperation is
what I was thinking at this level. I had more, I had
bigger problems with my own service than I did with
the others. And this was later on, but you had asked
about the service rivalry, and that was back in the
early days.
There are a couple of things that were, let's see,
on the good news side, I call that bad news side,
that I was involved in while in the Air Force
Secretary's office.
The Air Force Museum is located at
Wright-Patterson Airport Station, Ohio. You can
go to many air bases and you'll see gathering of old
airplanes. The real museum is at
Wright-Patterson.
It is not a public finance facility or
installation. It was privately endowed. It was
built by subscriptions, by donations, by every
way imaginable. Tax money was not used to build it.
But at the same time, since it was built on an Air
Force installation, the Secretary chose to have a
real tight control over what type of facility was
built and so on. Well, the minute the Secretary did
that, then Mr. Turner, it's your job. You carry it
out. Mr. Turner, come in here. Let's talk about the
museum. So I ended up being initially the recorder
on the Air Force Museum board. And we went through a
couple of years of fighting out what type of
facility would be built.
of the Air Force Logistics Command,
a man by the name of Merrill. And Merrill
listened to everything that went back and forth.
And he and Luke Turner were real good friends. Both
of them had come up in the controller business. And
they were real good friends. And it had been
proposed initially by the board to go along with
the design of an architect engineer firm in
Hartford, Connecticut. And this design, we felt,
that is the board, as well as the recorder, was
going to end up being a
monument to the capability of the architect
engineer rather than a museum for the Air Force. It
was going to be something that people would just
look at and forget what was on the inside. And
something that we could never reach in dollar
payments. The amount of money that we had
subscribed and collected was up in the $4 million,
$5 million, and $6 million. But this thing was up in
the $18 million, $20 million, and $25 million. We
were talking about some dollars back there. So
General Merrill,
who's a four-star, asked Turner to have me meet him
in Hartford. We spent the whole day up there
listening to the architects and engineers. Then
we went out to the airport, left them alone and went
out to the airport. And he had his plane away from
taking back to Ohio, and I had a commercial to go
back to Washington. And we sat down for an hour. And
he says, what do you recommend? I said, General, I
hate to tell you this, because this is probably not
what you want to hear. But I said, I think we ought to
scrub it and start over. He said, those are my
sentiments also. He said, as long as you and I never
change, He took off, popped, and we started all
over again. We scrubbed that architect. We
started again. We've got something back that was
within reach. We've got a beautiful museum up
there now. Thousands of people daily come into
that thing. I think we've got one I've ever heard
the airport has ever flown that's on static
display and all types of everything. It's a
beautiful museum. Why in Ohio instead of out at the
Academy? Well, because Wright-Patterson is the
headquarters of the Air Force Logistics Command
and two of the divisions of the Aeronautics of Air
Force Systems Command. Systems Command does the
research and development. Log Command does the
supply and the modifications once they're into
the inventory. So that is really the center of
where all of the research development is done and
where all of the maintenance and modifications
are directed from. The two divisions of the Air
Force Systems Command are the technology, which
is foreign technology, and one of the research
divisions. So it is a better place, really, than
the Air Force Museum. Really, I guess, pulls more
people than something way out in Colorado. You can
keep getting repeats out there, but in Ohio, you
get different people all the time. I don't know why
they come through there in the wintertime. I hate
it in the wintertime. But anyway, that board then
grew to the Air Force Academy Expansion Board. The
job was over for the museum. From then on, it was
execution. That was up to the people at Wright and
Pack. Oh, we kept an eye on it. Then we went from
there to the Air Force Academy expansion. That's
when Congress
permitted the Air Force Academy to go from 2,500
students to 4,417. When it was first formed, it was
smaller than And then they enlarged it, the
authorization. And with that, we had to build more
dorm space, more classroom space, add on to the
dining hall. We had all of this to do. And this all
came right on the tail of building one of the
largest field houses that you and I will ever have
seen. It is a fabulous field house.
We had the field house under control. Again,
Turner put it under control. You do not have a
nickel over the appropriation. I will not go back
to Congress and ask for one nickel more than has
been appropriated. He told this to General
Curtin, and he said, my dog catcher is hugged. He's
going to watch every dollar. got to establish a
direct communication between HUB and the man in
Colorado, and it's not going to get one nickel
more. He didn't get one nickel more. Again, it
would swap out and everything else. But
beautiful. Then we went on in to overseeing the
expansion of the academy. But like I said earlier,
the Air Force did have special permission to do its
own design and construction work for its academy
without having to go to the Corps of Engineers or so
on. The, this board had, I've used the name
Sheridan, the man from the Department of Defense
was on it. The superintendent of the Air Force
Academy, of course, was on the board. Those are the
two that really
played a role in what I was doing and then later on.
What was the end result? The end result was on time
as the wing built up and grunted people in. Oh,
certainly we had problems. Glass in that part of
the country is a hard thing to control. Different
coefficient of expansions of glass and metal trim
caused all types of popping of glass, sand
blowing. And that part of the country etched glass
that we didn't foresee.
So we had to go back and raise the standards and the
hardness of glass and so on. But it's
a beautiful facility. A&M will even envy some of
the things that they've done. They have, for
instance, A&M doesn't really need it because it
gets cold at College Station. I know that. But it
doesn't get cold like it does out there. But when
the cadets march into the dining hall at the Air
Force Academy, they go through a screen that they
never see. And it's a double screen of warm air
blowing both from the floor and the ceiling to keep
the cold air from coming in with the cadets. so that
the inside of the dining hall never feels the draft
when those doors open and cadets marching in. And
they just march through these two screens, and the
temperature inside never changes. Can you
imagine that on the dining hall of the college
station? Oh, man. Fabulous. Fantastic. So those
are the two good things that you feel that happened
from 1963 to 1968 when you were working in the
Secretary's office. On the outside, again, I was
doing Boy Scout work. I don't know how much you know
about the Boy Scouts, but I was given a silver
beaver at that time by the Boy Scouts. So I did have
time to do some other things. Good. tremendous i
was uh wondering then how exactly how your
functions and duties changed when you went from
master planning to the secretary of the army's
office secretary airport yeah i'm sorry of course
well of course i took the master planning response
i mean the access road responsibility with me so uh
in master planning that was that was worrying
about, oh, a fourth of my time. And as I got to the
secretary's office, I guess it dropped to about,
oh, maybe a fifth or sixth of my time. And then these
other things picked up. The museum, the academy,
the base in Vietnam, and different problems. I
initially went to the secretary's office to be
just a straight exec to the civilians. And that's
what I was the first year under Alan McComb. But
when Turner came in, he said, man, you ain't about
to be an executive. He said, I'm giving you a job, a
specific thing that you're responsible for. And
what did you think of that? I thought that was
great. I said, what are we going to do about the
executive? He said, I've already got another
military authorization. And you tell me which one
of those colonels down there you want. And we just
brought in another lieutenant colonel, and he
became the exec. He kept tabs on everything that
was going on. Well, why did they switch you to
specific jobs instead of keep you as the exec?
Because he wanted me doing functional work, doing
things that he was responsible for. Whereas the
exec, it's an important role, but then he keeps his
finger on everything that's going on in the
office. He's really kind of responsible for
nothing except what the boss specifically says.
You do this and come back to me. Oh, I'd rather have
the functional role. Because in the other four
years, I did engineering and construction. And I
did operation and maintenance. And got into the
problem and had things at that level. Now, I wanted
to ask you about Vietnam since. You had been there a
number of times, although you weren't in the
combat in Vietnam itself. I'm sure that you must
have some ideas on this. Why did we lose the war in
Vietnam?
I wouldn't even tell you. Okay. Tell me about
Harold Brown. You started talking about him, but
you said you got to know him very well, but you never
described him. What type of person is he?
Well, Heron Brown, when he was Secretary of the Air
Force, was
probably
the most
contemporary
thinker
with real strong technological ability that that
level is probably never seen. You've got to
remember that that's one level below the
Secretary of Defense. And there's nothing else
like it in our government. Because as the
Secretary of the Air Force, even though he was
under a cabinet man, he probably had more power
than some of the people that were on the cabinet.
well-educated individual that was
always ahead in thinking. You could talk to a man or
brief him, and you knew damn good and well that he
was five or ten minutes ahead of you, but at the same
time, the guy that had the patience to hear you
through. I never saw the man get impatient Man
with a good sense of humor.
Now, I'm saying this when he was Secretary of the
Air Force. I'd still not know him as anytime in his
role in the Department of Defense. But you thought
he was a good leader at the Air Force? Oh, yes. Very
good. Gene Zuckert is what the Air Force needed.
Gene was a lawyer.
Harold Brown a technical man. But Gene was what we
needed when the Air Force was down and building up
fast. Brown was what we needed when, OK, let's
start thinking about the future and research and
development. Let's start putting some chips in
the long range and see if there are not systems that
are lying out there waiting to be discovered and so
on. And this is what we were talking about the other
day. We need both the practitioner and we need that
thinker in that reserve. Okay, let's move to the
United Kingdom. Your next job with the Third Air
Force as the Deputy Chief of Staff from 1968 to
1970. Okay, let me tell you a little bit about how I
got there. Go ahead.
During
the last year that I worked in Secretary's office,
I had made up my mind to retire. And I had put in my
retirement papers and
was even taking a physical, a retirement
physical, at the airport hospital at Andrews.
Why'd you decide to retire? Well, I was a reserve
officer at that time. And
it's a strange thing in personnel work, but I was on
active duty as a lieutenant colonel, but I was a
permanent colonel in the reserve. And I couldn't
see getting anywhere getting promoted and I had 27
years in which gave me close to the maximum for
retirement and I would have retired as a
pro-Colonel Payne rather than a Lieutenant
Colonel even though My active duty grade was only
lieutenant colonel. As a reserve officer, I was a
full colonel, and that's what I was retired of.